so in this section we are going to be building
some GUI applications in Java now Java
applications can obviously have
graphical user interfaces and we haven't
used that at all in this course to date
we've use everything from a main console
and done all our output and we've really has
concentrated on the Java language
itself rather than producing sort of
GUI type graphical user interfaces
thing is that Java applications can
as I said have graphical user interfaces
that contain things such as buttons
lists checkboxes menus toolbars and many
other controls that allow users to
interact with rich client applications
now JavaFX is what we're going to be
using here and that's a set of API's
that can be used to build interfaces in Java tnen what it is it's really
essentially a set of Java packages and
it's the successor to swing which you may
heard of which was Java's UI toolkit
of choice and recommended for many years but
that's actually been deprecated now and
Oracle's direction is to use JavaFX
and that's why we've chosen or why I've
chosens that for this course now we can use JavaFX to
develop the UI for desktop applications
Internet applications and mobile devices
but what I'm going to do is focus
on desktop applications because
obviously to really give justice to
JavaFX we need a complete course we
haven't got that we just got this
section so we need to focus on that so we are gonna focus on desktop applications
now the other thing to keep in mind is
that the latest version of JavaFX is
JavaFX 8 and it's packaged with the
Java 8
JDK Java runtime Edition Java
Development Kit so if you want to make
sure that you using the Java 8 SDK
when you're building a JavaFX application
and if you followed the information in
this course in through the installation
setup I did actually recommend that you
downloaded the Java 8 SDK so if you
haven't done if you are using an older
version JDK 7 or earlier
make sure you update it because you
won't be able to use this
you will be finding you weill be getting all sorts of errors now IntelliJ has got a plugin that supports Java
FX applications which is pretty cool
and when we installed IntelliJ earlier in the
course that plugin was installed and
enabled by default at least it should
have been so what we going to do
is we are going to create our first JavaFX project and we are going to do
something very simple as a familiar
hello world example cuz we need to start
on the basic so you can click on file new
project or you can come over here and
click on Create new project and I'm
going to choose JavaFX you can see I've
already got it selected I'm gonna choose that so
normally we have been choosing Java up here and
I'm gonna choose JavaFX the other thing is I've
actually invalidated my project SDK
because I wanted to bring
something to your attention in that in
later parts of this section their is going to
be some features that were using that
require a more up-to-date version of JDK 8
so I've mentioned that we actually
need JDK 8 but their is particular
class for example that uses a particular
version of the JDK so it's a good
opportunity to make sure you are up to date
as possible so what I'm going to do I've downloaded a new
version of the JDK and installed it so I
just wanted to show you again how to
do that and I deleted my old version that's
why it's now complaining because that
was the version that I was using earlier
so gonna click on here and take this
opportunity click on new JDK and what
IntelliJ should do is it shouldn't go to the
latest version anyway and depending on
whether your on a Mac which I am I will
get that path and if your in windows you get a
different paths and likewise for Linux
and possible you might need
to go and find those folders manually
and if you need any help with that go
back to the installation
videos
you know the first section of the course on
how to do that so I'm gonna select the
latest version i download which is 1.8.0_73 click on OK and
that's version we are going to be using for the JavaFX application and click on Next we
need a name and I'm gonna call this
one hello
world FX click on finish and that will then create a
basic project and we have a look at that
and you can see it has created some other code here now before I get into that I just
want to also point out a few other
things firstly to check if you got that plugins so if
you didn't see that JavaFX come up as an
option on the screen you can come up into
IntelliJ coming into preferences and
then select plugins
and typed in FX and it should come up automatically with JavaFX there and you
can see it's actually clicked and it's
ready to go and basically it's installed and if
you click on enable you can see that it's actually
installed so that should happen and by
chance it didn't happen and you couldn't
see JavaFX you download the JavaFX
plugin like so and select it and their will be an option here to install it and then you need to restart IntelliJ and
then you'd have the version so  if
you find you didn't see that JavaFX
selection go back and install the
plugin that way alright so let's return
back to our project again you can see that
we've got some files here we've got
Controller.java Main.java
we've also got sample.fxml now JavaFX itself was
designed with the MVC
which is multiple-view-controller patent in mind
and what that is is in a nutshell is
that it's the patent that keeps the code
that handles and applications data
separate from the UI or user interface code because of this when we are using the
MVC patent we wouldn't mix the code that
deals with the UI and the
code that manipulates the application
data in the same class so the controller is the
sort of middle man between the UI and the
data so it sort of hands off the
requests to each and sort of manages
that process now when you're working
with JavaFX the model corresponds to the
applications data model the view is the
fxml and the controller is the code
that determines what happens when a user
interacts with the UI now essentially
the controller handles events and will
cover those in a later lesson and I guess
what I've done their is I've over
simplified the MVC patent but it's enough
for you right now to understand why
IntelliJ generates a controller Java file and a
fxml file when we create a JavaFX
project now just to be clear JavaFX
doesn't enforce the MVC patent but it's
absolutely a good idea and I really
recommend that you do follow that now
for the simple hello world application there
obviously isn't any data and also the
code generated by IntelliJ doesn't
create any Java UI controls by default so
apart from the usual window
controls you know minimize maximize and close
their is really nothing to interact with
and as a results if we open the controller code
you can see quite literally that it's
actually empty at this stage so and that's
because again we haven't actually
added any controls so we go back and open the main
class and have a look at that and you can see
that there is some code their and obviously
it should look pretty family because the
basic concept is very similar to what
we've dealt with before we've got imports
and you notice there's a heap of imports
on lines 3 to 7 and are added automatically
we've got a public class main extends
application and we've also got a public
static void main down here and you can
see that's little bit different we haven't seen
that before because that is actually launching
something and we've got this start method
as you can see there and the start
method has really got all the mechanisms
to kick-start our JavaFX application so to
start with looking at line 9 you can
see that the class extends the the
JavaFX .Application class
now JavaFX applications have to have a class
that extends the application class and
this class will be the entry point
for the application similar to the
classes we've created before the main
classes in other projects it need to
have a main class and needed to have a main
method in this case a JavaFX
application also needs to extend the
application classes as were doing on line
9 now the application class manages the
life cycle of a JavaFX application
the methods in the application class
that we care about most are the init
method the start method and the stop
method and at the moment you can see
we've got a start method in their when we run
the application application.launch will
be called from the main method you can
see that on line 21 that we were invoking
launch passing on the arguments that are
passed to the main method that method
launches the JavaFX application and doesn't
return until the application has exited
so in other words until we closed our UI so lets look at
the start method in more detail that
starting on line 12 that was generated
automatically by IntelliJ now the
method takes a stage parameter
now what a stage is a top level JavaFX
container that extends the window class
so think of it essentially as a main
window now the JavaFX runtime constructs
the initial stage and passes it into
to the start method itself so its passing
that as a parameter you not having to do
that that's happening automatically with
JavaFX you can see that again on line 12
so in the current version of JavaFX dialog
are presented within the stage but we
don't explicitly create the stage now we
used to dialog class which wraps the
dialogue in a stage for us and the
JavaFX developers have said that in a
future version of JavaFX they
might provide a light weight container for
dialogues rather than using a stage and
you'll understand more about dialogues as we continue
moving forward but note that the dialog
class was introduced in JavaFX or Java
version 8u40 so before then creating
dialogues was a real pain so with the
later versions of Java the JDK it's a lot
easier now because of what they've
introduced so we will use that dialog class
at some point in the future but if you
have any issues
compiling these classes that reference
dialog make sure that you've got a JDK
that is later than 8u40 and you saw that
earlier I showed you when I was running
version 73 if in doubt go and download the latest JDK and make sure your using that
and you can either select that when you have
chosen your project that's probably the
easiest thing to do but if you want to
change it and you didn't get a chance to
change it lets say you've already created the project and you want to figure out how do I change my JDK you
can do that easy enough you can
right-click the project and then come
down and select open module settings and
you come down here into SDK and you
make sure you've got the right version selected you can see I've got 2 versions now the second one I created was
version 73 and I've also got the 1.8 which was the
incorrect version so you would select
the new version after creating it so what
you can also do here is you can also
click on the + button and that's how you go
about setting up a new version of the
JDK for an application that you've already created but in this
case I'm gonna leave it selected on
version 1.8
.0_73 click on ok because it is valid and I will give
you a reminder when we used to dialog
class in later lectures about this but if you are having problems
make sure you're using the latest or
fairly recent JDK version 8 so the
next line of code on line 13 is loading
the UI from the fxml
file so what we'll do is we'll take a look at the fxml file now so I'm going to open that first and then
talk about it so think of fxml as a flavor xml which it is you could probably noticed some of
these that its got an XML look and feel now if
you're part of my android course then
you'll be familiar with some of the
XML but we haven't really touched
on XML much in this course to date but
it's really just a mechanism a way
to described data so if your familiar with Android UI
programming then fxml will probably
be old hat to you so in this application what we
have is a grid pane and that's one of
the JavaFX layouts and you can see that
on line 6 of the sample fxml
the fx:controller attribute tells the
run time which classes the controller for this
window now the grid pane doesn't have
any child elements and so when we run
the application the window is going to be empty
will run it in a minute just to confirm and
for some reason the generated fxml contains a few
unnecessary imports
and we know they are unnecessary ones on line 1 4 and 5 because they are in gray but right now we only need
the grid pane because that is all we actually got in this
file and you can see that on line 2
that the import is in green which tells us
that it actually is in use so but later
on we are gonna actually add a label to this
is well and as we progress through
you'll see that how this takes affect and
how this gets change for us automatically so let's
now go back to start method again in main so
again looking at line 13 when we
load the fxml file which we
doing at line 13 all the UI objects defined in the
file are constructed to that point in time
so we'll come back to the parent
root component on line 13 in a moment but
on line 14 we set the title of the stage
and actually what I'll do before I
go any further let us run this to see
what it actually does just to confirm
that we've actually got something that
works we will run this and there's our little
application and that's what this by
default is actually doing a simple GUI
is just drawing this window there's the
title which we can see we are setting on
line 14 and we've got three buttons I've
talking about earlier which are their by default minimize
closed maximize and click on Close to close
the application down and notice by  doing
that
it then exited the app so getting back to line 14 when we set the
title on the stage as
you can see there and since the window
class is the parent of the stage class
and as we learned previously the stages
is the top-level JavaFX container what this
essentially means is the window  title will be set to hello world so
what we do is this .setTitle using primary stage that is setting the title and you saw
that when I just ran the app in the short time ago
next we are gonna look at line 15 and you can see
it's got their primaryStage.setScene and we're doing just that we are setting
the stage as Scene now if you haven't already
guessed the JavaFX developers were
going for a theater metaphor here so every
stage requires a scene and backing every
scene is a scene graph and that's a tree in
which each node corresponding to a UI
control or an area of the scene in this
case for example a rectangle so let's take
a look at this code in more detail so again
looking at line 15 when we load the
fxml we assign it to a variable of type parent
with a name route now the parent class
descends directly from the node class and which is based class for the scene
graph nodes and that is taken exactly from
the java doc itself so nodes that descend from
parent can have children in the scene
graph now for the hello world application
the top level and in fact the only node
is the grid pane which we saw in the
fxml file so the grid pane node will be the root of the scene graph and
as a result that's what was returned
from the fxml loader.load method
which were used on line 13 now when we
construct a scene we have to pass in the
root of that scene graph back
the scene and will do that here on
line 15 we're talking about so we also
set the width and the height of the scene
which in turn then becomes the width and
height of the main window now you might be
asking why do we have to have a scene and
a stage so to understand that lets go
back to the theater metaphor so just
imagine that you are watching a play so the
curtain rises and we watched the first
scene then the curtain falls stagehands
run around and change the furniture
and backdrop and then the
curtain rises again so we might you know
we may see a different looking set
and different actors but it's still
essentially the same stage so if you go
back to JavaFX remember that a stage
corresponds to a top-level UI container
like a window and a scene is backed by
a scene graph and that essentially
contains the UI nodes so if you want to
change what was shown in a stage the window
effectively is what a stage is then all we
have to do is change the scene which is
the UI for that to happen so we don't
have to construct a new stage object now in
practice you would load a different fxml file into a new scene and then just
call Stage.setScene like we did on line 15 now for
example if we had a wizard that we want
to use it to step through using Next and
Previous buttons we could use the same
window the stage in other words and just
change the scene each time they clicked
next or previous or when we want to
change parts of the UI in response to user
action and we don't have we don't
actually have to remove UI components
or even make them invisible and add new
ones so we can just switch the scene in that scenario and that's what is particularly
a cool feature of  JavaFX and that was to
do that and sometimes it makes more
sense to just hide a few controls or
something like that but other times
switching the entire scene is a better
option it really depends on what we're
trying to do and what you trying to achieve
essentially though scene make it easy to
reuse a container so just getting back
to finish off this overview before we
start making changes let's have a look
now at line sixteen and at this point
when it gets to this code
we have instantiated all the UI objects
associated with our scene we've set the
stage so at this point we're ready to show
the UI and by calling the .show method that
actually does that that's the code that launches the application well that's
the first video in the section I'm gonna
stop this video here now in the next
video will continue on and will start
looking at changing the code a little
bit and furthering our knowledge on
JavaFX so see you in the next video